= googl

Google URL Shortener API in Ruby

== Basic Usage

=== Shorten a long URL

  url = Googl.shorten('http://www.zigotto.com')

  url.short_url
  => "http://goo.gl/ump4S"

  url.long_url
  => "http://www.zigotto.com/"

  url.qr_code
  => "http://goo.gl/ump4S.qr"

  url.info
  => "http://goo.gl/ump4S.info"

=== Expand a short URL

  url = Googl.expand('http://goo.gl/ump4S')

  url.long_url
  => "http://www.zigotto.com/"

== Authentication

The Google URL Shortener API supports the OAuth and ClientLogin mechanisms for authenticating.

For shorten requests, each short URL for an authenticated user is unique, and thus will gather unique click statistics. In addition, it shows up on the user's dashboard at http://goo.gl.

=== ClientLogin

  client = Googl.client('user@gmail.com', 'my_valid_password')

  url = client.shorten('https://github.com/zigotto/googl')
  url.short_url
  => http://goo.gl/DWDfi

Go to http://goo.gl to see URL statistics.

=== OAuth

Google supports three flows of OAuth 2.0

* The <b>client-side</b> flow for JavaScript applications running in a browser. (TODO)
* The <b>server-side</b> flow for web applications with servers that can securely store persistent information.
* The <b>native application</b> flow for desktop and mobile applications.

Today, gem googl support only <b>server-side</b> and <b>native application</b>.

==== Server-side web applications

You'll need to register your application with Google to get a <em>client_id</em> and record the <em>redirect_uri</em> you'd like to use. 
See the Registering[http://code.google.com/apis/accounts/docs/OAuth2.html#Registering] your app with Google section for details on how to register.

  client = Googl::OAuth2.server("client_id", "client_secret", "redirect_uri")

Redirect your users to

  client.authorize_url

After the user approves access or chooses not to, we'll redirect to the <em>redirect_uri</em> you passed us and append either an authorization code.

  client.request_access_token(params["code"])
  client.authorized?
  => true

Now you can get a user's history, shorten url, etc...

  history = client.history
  history.total_items
  => 19

  url = Googl.shorten('https://github.com/zigotto/googl')
  url.short_url
  => http://goo.gl/DWDfi

==== Native applications

You'll need to register your application with Google to get a <em>client_id</em> and record the special <em>redirect_uri: urn:ietf:wg:oauth:2.0:oob</em>. 
See the Registering[http://code.google.com/apis/accounts/docs/OAuth2.html#Registering] your app with Google section for details on how to register.

When you use this redirect_uri, instead of redirecting the user's browser to a page on your site with an authorization code, Google will display the authorization code or error response in the title of the page and a text field with instructions for the user to copy and paste it in to your application. Your application can either monitor the window title of a web-view or browser window it launches and close it once the authorization code appears or prompt the user to copy and paste the code.

  client = Googl::OAuth2.native("client_id", "client_secret")

Open a browser or a webview to the OAuth dialog at

  client.authorize_url

In the native app flow, after the user approves access, we'll display the authorization code in the title of the page and in a text input with instructions for the user to copy and paste the code to your application

  code = "copied code"
  client.request_access_token(code)
  client.authorized?
  => true

== Analytics

Expands a short URL or gets creation time and analytics

For analytics and additional information to return (using the :projection parameter)

  :full                    returns the creation timestamp and all available analytics
  :analytics_clicks        returns only click counts
  :analytics_top_strings   returns only top string counts (e.g. referrers, countries, etc)

=== Get Analytics
  
  url = Googl.expand('http://goo.gl/DWDfi', :projection => :full)

  url.analytics.all_time.browsers.first.label
  => "Chrome"
  url.analytics.all_time.browsers.first.count
  => "11"

A summary of the click analytics for the short and long URL

  url.analytics

Analytics details for a particular window of time; counts in this object are of clicks that occurred within the most recent window of this length.
  
  url.analytics.all_time
  url.analytics.month
  url.analytics.week
  url.analytics.day
  url.analytics.two_hours
  
Number of clicks on this short URL. Replace (*) for all_time, month, week, day or two_hours
  
  url.analytics.*.short_url_clicks
  
Number of clicks on all goo.gl short URLs pointing to this long URL.
  
  url.analytics.*.long_url_clicks
  
Top referring hosts, e.g. "www.google.com"; sorted by (descending) click counts. Only present if this data is available.
  
  url.analytics.*.referrers
  
Top countries (expressed as country codes), e.g. "US" or "DE"; sorted by (descending) click counts.
  
  url.analytics.*.countries
  
Top browsers, e.g. "Chrome"; sorted by (descending) click counts.
  
  url.analytics.*.browsers
  
Top platforms or OSes, e.g. "Windows"; sorted by (descending) click counts.
  
  url.analytics.*.platforms
  
For details, see http://code.google.com/intl/pt-BR/apis/urlshortener/v1/reference.html#resource_url

== History

Gets a user's history of shortened URLs. (Authenticated)

  client = Googl.client('user@gmail.com', 'my_valid_password')

  history = client.history
  history.total_items
  => 19

A list of URL.

  history.items

Analytics details for all items

  history = client.history(:projection => :analytics_clicks)

== Installation

  gem install googl

== License

MIT License. Copyright 2011 Zigotto®. http://www.zigotto.com.br
